[Amit Varma]: Before we move on with this episode of the Scene in the Unseen, do check out another
[Amit Varma]: awesome podcast from IVM Podcast, Cyrus Says, hosted by my old buddy, Cyrus Brocha.
[Amit Varma]: The 2019 general elections are upon us and it's a good time to ask, what do our political
[Amit Varma]: parties believe in? Most parties espouse principles only as a matter of positioning in the political
[Amit Varma]: marketplace. They will say anything and do anything that gets them votes. They are immoral
[Amit Varma]: and sociopathic. You vote for them on the basis of what you want in that political marketplace
[Amit Varma]: and how credibly they can deliver that. But there is one political party in India that
[Amit Varma]: is clearly different. The BJP does seem to have certain core beliefs. And because they
[Amit Varma]: are the biggest political player around, and because beliefs have consequences, it is worth
[Amit Varma]: examining their philosophy. What is this Hindutva thing? What is this Hindu Rashtra that so
[Amit Varma]: many people aspire to? What does it mean for our nation that the BJP's idea of India is
[Amit Varma]: so exclusionary, so full of resentments from the past, so dependent on identity? And most
[Amit Varma]: importantly, what are its intellectual foundations? Welcome to the scene and the unseen, our weekly
[Amit Varma]: podcast on economics, politics and behavioral science. Please welcome your host, Amit Badma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen. My guest today is Aakar Patel, a journalist and columnist
[Amit Varma]: whose work I have been reading since the 1990s, who is often provocative, usually insightful,
[Amit Varma]: and always worth reading. I asked Aakar to come on the show as a guest in the expectation
[Amit Varma]: of nothing other than a stimulating conversation, and I didn't have a subject in mind for him.
[Amit Varma]: Then Aakar mentioned that he's writing a book called Our Hindu Rashtra, which will be released
[Amit Varma]: by Westland later this year. It made perfect sense to talk about that, especially with
[Amit Varma]: these ongoing elections, to take a closer look at what is fast becoming an idea of India
[Amit Varma]: that has gained immense traction in the last few years. What is Hindutva exactly? Why has
[Amit Varma]: it become so popular recently? What are its intellectual foundations? I got the stimulating
[Amit Varma]: conversation I wanted and you're invited to listen in. But first, a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: This episode of the scene in the unseen is brought to you by Storytel. Storytel is an
[Amit Varma]: audiobook platform which you can listen to on your Android or iOS app. They have thousands
[Amit Varma]: of audio books that you can listen to on your mobile, including hundreds in local languages
[Amit Varma]: like Hindi and Marathi, and unlimited monthly subscription costs only rupees 299 per month.
[Amit Varma]: And you can also get a 30 day free trial if you hop on over to storytel.com slash IBM.
[Amit Varma]: I actually use Storytel myself regularly. So as long as they sponsor the show, I'm going
[Amit Varma]: to recommend one book a week that I love. My recommendation today is a book I finished
[Amit Varma]: reading a month ago called Atomic Habits by James Clear. I have a huge problem of discipline.
[Amit Varma]: My mind keeps wandering. I crave the dopamine rush of social media. I never seem to get
[Amit Varma]: anything done. But Atomic Habits has some great insights on how the brain works and
[Amit Varma]: how we can discipline it one atomic habit at a time. James Clear also has a great weekly
[Amit Varma]: newsletter. But hey, you can hear his book for free on Storytel. And remember, you get
[Amit Varma]: a 30 day free trial only at storytel.com slash IBM.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene in the unseen. Thank you. Before we get going talking about the
[Amit Varma]: book that you're writing and the subject at hand, tell me a little bit about yourself.
[Amit Varma]: You've been a journalist, right since the early 90s. And now you had amnesty in India.
[Guest]: What's your journey been like? Sure. I'm from Surat. And I moved to Bombay in 94 at the
[Guest]: end of 94. Looking for work and the sort of easiest work one could find with not much
[Guest]: qualification was in journalism then. I think the case is the same now. And I worked in
[Guest]: newspapers till 2005. I ran a business for a few years after that. And then I retired.
[Guest]: And five years after that, I got a job in a nonprofit, which is where I am now.
[Amit Varma]: And you've kind of been a prolific columnist, even now. And you know, as someone who is
[Amit Varma]: also a columnist, one of the things I marvel at is how much prolific you are, how many
[Guest]: columns you actually get. So there is a tradition in the language papers
[Guest]: of South Asia, whether they are in Gujarati, Hindi, Marathi, Urdu, where you have somebody
[Guest]: who is like an autodidact, not a specialist, and a regular writer. So any newspaper in
[Guest]: Pakistan or in Bangladesh or in Surat will have such people who work for newspapers,
[Guest]: who write three, four times a week. So I think I come from that tradition. So writing is
[Guest]: easy, and it gets easier when you do it more and more.
[Amit Varma]: And you had a deep interest in Urdu also, I believe you started learning it in the 1990s.
[Amit Varma]: You've written a lot about it. Tell me about that interest and how it's kind of...
[Guest]: I worked in a newspaper that also had a Murdu edition, which sort of fascinated me. And
[Guest]: I thought I should try and learn the script. And then the series of Malwis came home, this
[Guest]: was in early 2000. And they taught me how to read it. And at some point, I figured out
[Guest]: that this was just the Hindi that I knew from Bollywood, written a different way. So the
[Guest]: mystery and the romance left at that point. But I knew the language sufficiently to be
[Guest]: able to do some basic translations. And I did that.
[Guest]: And you also translated Montauk's works. Yes. So he's quite an interesting writer.
[Guest]: He was autodidactic himself, didn't pass out of college, and wrote very simply, I think
[Guest]: he wrote the kind of language that you and I would recognize as being Hindi. He would
[Guest]: call it Urdu. So it wasn't that difficult. The perso-Arabic content, which tends to define
[Guest]: Urdu in our time was fairly low in his writing.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, just this issue itself about how there was this common sort of bhaasha called
[Amit Varma]: Hindustani and then out of that you had this movement to separate Urdu and Hindi and then,
[Amit Varma]: you know, also speaks to a bit about what we're talking about today, doesn't it? Is
[Guest]: that part of the nationalism? Indeed, indeed. I think you're dead right.
[Guest]: I think with both with the movement that happened in the heartland, Bhartendu, Harishchandra
[Guest]: and so on in the 19th century, and whatever happened with Urdu after 1947 in Pakistan
[Guest]: and here is part of that narrative that you try to hold on to your nationalism through
[Guest]: the script, and the language then changes. Pakistanis that I know think that Bollywood
[Guest]: is, is actually their language, Urdu. And when I asked them what they think Hindi is,
[Guest]: they would say something like, it's what Vajpayee speaks, you know, whereas we would listen
[Guest]: to Jio TV or one of the Pakistani stations, and it would not be that easy for us to pick
[Guest]: it out. I think the vocabulary has changed a bit across the border. The grammar of course
[Amit Varma]: remains the same.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the things that I can't often figure out is that when Modi gives many of his speeches
[Amit Varma]: like his addresses to the nation and chooses to speak in Hindi, he's not actually speaking
[Amit Varma]: in the regular colloquial Hindi in which you and I might converse, but a shuddh form of
[Amit Varma]: it using those shuddh Hindi terms. And I've always wondered that if if he is trying to
[Amit Varma]: spread his thing as a national leader, isn't that strategically unwise? Or does that in
[Amit Varma]: itself imply some kind of message and positioning?
[Guest]: That's a good question. I think there are many Hindis and I think the one that he uses,
[Guest]: I would say is less stripped of what we would call Hindustani than a lot of other people.
[Guest]: I think Vajpayee wrote a much more Sanskritized form of the language. Mr. Modi comes out of
[Guest]: a tradition where in Gujarati, it's been a language which has had access to Arabic and
[Guest]: Farsi for a very long time. And the modern Gujarati vocabulary is not dependent on, for
[Guest]: instance, English, to be able to have sophisticated communication in commerce. So we have words
[Guest]: like say Hundi or Hawala, which are bad words, otherwise outside of Gujarat. But for a Gujarati,
[Guest]: they would purely be these are both words from our area would just be purely words that
[Guest]: would represent transactions. So I think he would be using a lot of Farsi words, you know,
[Guest]: we call a door a Darwajo, which is actually a Persian word. And, and so on. So I don't
[Guest]: think that it's as stripped as Mr. Vajpayee's was. But it is, as you say, fairly Sanskritized
[Amit Varma]: in many ways.
[Amit Varma]: Like just the use of the word Mitro and I could be wrong here, but it seems to me that
[Amit Varma]: Mitro is not something people would use in normal conversation, let's say Dosto or Yaro
[Guest]: or whatever. And, yeah, he has a bit of a style to him. So I think he he's quite studied
[Guest]: in the way that he approaches his public image quite seriously. And he would have given a
[Guest]: great deal of thought to how to present himself and what what should the catchphrases be is
[Guest]: the kind of guy who spends a lot of time thinking about this. So before we kind of get to your
[Amit Varma]: book, you know, we are recording this on March 28, the episode comes out on April 8. What
[Amit Varma]: do you think is, you know, is going to happen in these elections? What's your?
[Guest]: My sense is that we'll have a hung parliament. And I my sense is that it will be more hung
[Guest]: than people think it's going to be. And I think that's a good thing. I think that the
[Guest]: more parties that have access to the pie in Delhi, the more levers you have for civil
[Guest]: society, us, you know, NGO, we don't have that much to hold on to when there is a single
[Guest]: party that rules Delhi, there's absolutely nobody that listens to you, particularly on
[Guest]: the difficult subjects. And I think that the more divided the share of power is, the better
[Guest]: it is for this country, the more voices are heard, the more the deeper the representation.
[Guest]: So my hope, at least if not my, my, my studied sort of, you know, analysis is that there
[Guest]: will be a hung parliament and it will be more hung than people think it will be.
[Amit Varma]: No, it's a great thing for another reason, in the sense that you automatically then have
[Amit Varma]: more checks and balances and at a time when institutions are being eroded anyway, that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, might be useful.
[Guest]: Well, the counter to what you're saying, and I completely agree with you, or the counter
[Guest]: to what you're saying might well be the fact that, okay, look at say, UP at two, when you
[Guest]: have a weak center, and when you don't have a central figure of authority, then the periphery
[Guest]: and the ministries do you know, whatever they want to and so it's sort of, you know, double
[Guest]: edged, but I on the whole think that South Asia generally is better off when power at
[Guest]: the center is split, and it's not unified in the form of either a person definitely
[Guest]: not in the form of a person or a party.
[Amit Varma]: So let's let's talk about your book now.
[Amit Varma]: Your book is about the Hindu Rashtra, right?
[Amit Varma]: And you've been writing about this for donkey's years.
[Amit Varma]: What made you interested in the subject?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, over time, how have your thoughts on this evolved?
[Guest]: Well, coming from Surat, I had this sort of traditional middle class upbringing, very
[Guest]: Hindu, where the access to diversity was fairly low.
[Guest]: You did have, say, Muslims in your class, but because it was a school that was middle
[Guest]: class, and English, there wasn't as much representation of the society that you would be in.
[Guest]: And once you left school, Surat is fairly ghettoized, so it's it's a very old city.
[Guest]: The Brits came there in 1608, but it was already a big city, then Tolstoy wrote a short story
[Guest]: called the coffee house of Surat, where he says that a lot of people from around the
[Guest]: world, you know, Chinese people and Armenians and all gather and talk about life.
[Guest]: And it's true that it was a port city till the 18th century, it was both globalized and
[Guest]: ghettoized.
[Guest]: It was both globalized and ghettoized.
[Guest]: Very, very true.
[Guest]: It had access because of its port, it has a very sheltered port, or it did actually
[Guest]: now it's silted over.
[Guest]: But the port is inland from the sea.
[Guest]: So you could have fairly large ships come into the Arabian Sea and then come into Surat
[Guest]: and but then be on a river, the Tapi, which which cuts India in half, east to west.
[Guest]: And so it had access to the Portuguese and the Dutch and the English and so on, much
[Guest]: before the rest of India did.
[Guest]: It was the primary port of the Mughal Empire.
[Guest]: So it was where Hajj left from.
[Guest]: And it was this city and is this city which was segregated in terms of caste.
[Guest]: So you had something called a Sheri, which is a lane with a single mouth.
[Guest]: And you've got homes on both sides, you know, sharing walls of one caste.
[Guest]: So my mom grew up in a place called Sidh Matani Sheri, which is the neighborhood of the of
[Guest]: this goddess called Sidh Mata and it was full of partidar homes.
[Guest]: So when I go back to Surat, a lot of the neighbors there are still from the same caste and it's
[Guest]: sort of remained that way.
[Guest]: And how did that shape the young man you were?
[Guest]: One big difference between me and a lot of the other people from my background was the
[Guest]: fact that I went to a school there, where I was taught English.
[Guest]: So Surat at that point had four schools, it was a city of about 25 or 30 lakh people,
[Guest]: but there were only four schools that taught English, three of them set up by the missionaries
[Guest]: and one by the Parsis, Hindus who were 90% of the school's population had not built a
[Guest]: single one.
[Guest]: But that access to the language gave one access then to books.
[Guest]: There was there was one bookstore in Surat then, like a very large city.
[Guest]: But whatever I could get my hands on, I would read and that sort of opened up the world
[Guest]: in a way that would not have had I been like the rest of my cousins and so on, not in an
[Amit Varma]: English school.
[Amit Varma]: And how was it that you know, was there a time when you began to feel that you were
[Amit Varma]: apart from them in the way you looked at the world?
[Amit Varma]: Because I'm assuming that in that kind of background, if you grow up, you are pretty
[Amit Varma]: much someone who is going to grow up a Modi supporter, for example.
[Guest]: Yeah, so the BJP has become the party of Hindus in that state.
[Guest]: That's why we see very remarkable things like a vote share of more than 50%, which is very
[Guest]: unusual in democratic politics anywhere, but particularly in this country, because what
[Guest]: happens usually in our country is that you've got two dominant castes.
[Guest]: Let's say in Karnataka, we are in Bangalore now, you've got the Karega and you've got
[Guest]: the Lingayat.
[Guest]: So they would they would they would be a kind of a primary war over who would get access
[Guest]: to the state and the goodies that the state gives.
[Guest]: So it's usually that way.
[Guest]: What's happened in Gujarat is that though it started out that way, where the division
[Guest]: was basically the party that community supporting the BJP, which it does still the majority
[Guest]: of all BJP cabinets that have been formed in that state since 95 have comprised of the
[Guest]: Patel community.
[Guest]: And the other community was the New York Shatria or what is called Thakur Darbar these these
[Guest]: words which went to the Congress.
[Guest]: But what has happened is that the split is not even seats that are reserved, for instance,
[Guest]: for the schedule castes and the schedule tribes tend to go to the BJP entirely.
[Guest]: And the Congress has stayed there in almost permanent opposition.
[Guest]: I'm 49 years old, I came into the age of voting in 1988.
[Guest]: Every single Lok Sabha election that I have been old enough to vote for there has been
[Guest]: won by one BJP man.
[Guest]: Of course, he was denied a ticket after Mr. Modi came to power.
[Guest]: But Kashi Ramlana was the guy who represented Surat.
[Guest]: And from being somebody who was 18 or 19 to somebody who was in his 40s to have the same
[Guest]: person represent them, it's very unusual for the city especially.
[Guest]: But that's how Gujarat has has come to be.
[Amit Varma]: And as a young journalist, I mean, if you sort of look at the arc of your career at
[Amit Varma]: the start of your career, the Hindutva or the Hindu Rashtra or whatever was just about
[Amit Varma]: exploding with Babri and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And now it's kind of taken over the country in a sense.
[Amit Varma]: What was your approach to it then?
[Guest]: And you know, did you see this coming?
[Guest]: No, I didn't.
[Guest]: And it was like an episode then it seemed like something which was extraordinary, which
[Guest]: was behind us and I wasn't old enough or sort of mature enough certainly to be able to understand
[Guest]: what it had done, what that moment meant.
[Guest]: I had celebrated the night when the mosque was torn down.
[Guest]: I was with some friends and it seemed like a very big moment that something something
[Guest]: big had happened.
[Guest]: You celebrated?
[Guest]: I was excited.
[Guest]: I mean, I don't know if the word is celebrate.
[Guest]: But I was sort of I wouldn't say that I was disappointed.
[Guest]: I wasn't sad or like anything else.
[Guest]: That's the background that one grew up in, you know, the Muslims were them and we were
[Guest]: the we and then we had done something big and then.
[Guest]: But no, in the mid 90s, it had not occurred to me that this is that event was not just
[Guest]: one moment, but it was something that would live with us for a long time.
[Amit Varma]: So sort of two related questions, I guess, when did you start to realize that it was
[Amit Varma]: a process and it was becoming something and when did you also start to change from a position
[Amit Varma]: of looking at the world through that we or them thing?
[Guest]: I think moving to Bombay, it was still called Bombay when I moved.
[Guest]: Did some of that, that you had access to people who are much smarter than you.
[Guest]: And in the newsroom in those days, that was that was fairly sort of easy to come by very
[Guest]: bright people came to work for very little money.
[Guest]: People who are much better at than you and you worked with women.
[Guest]: I had never worked with a woman before in my life.
[Guest]: And this sort of sort of opens up your eyes if you are in any way open minded in a way
[Guest]: that very few things will because in a very brief period of time, you are exposed to people
[Guest]: who are smarter than you come from a different background, who might be from a gender that
[Guest]: you didn't think as being, you know, belonging in the workplace.
[Guest]: So you have you have an education drilled into you fairly, fairly quickly.
[Guest]: So I think by the mid 90s, yeah, I was there.
[Guest]: I also encountered some people whose writing stayed with me for a very long time.
[Guest]: And there's a man called Khalid Ahmed, who writes for the Express here in India.
[Guest]: He's he's a Lahori, he's a former diplomat in the Pakistani Foreign Service, a former
[Guest]: newspaper editor, both in Urdu, in English, he wrote for a paper called the Frontier Post
[Guest]: in Zia's period.
[Guest]: So that was not an easy time for journalists, definitely not for somebody who was a proper
[Guest]: intellectual, which which he is.
[Guest]: And he was bilingual.
[Guest]: So I think that really attracted me to him.
[Guest]: What we have on the subcontinent generally, and in this country in particular, is that
[Guest]: the intellectual narrative belongs to a group of people who are more or less a monolingual
[Guest]: that they can read in their own language, but they do not regularly read in it.
[Guest]: And they certainly don't write it.
[Guest]: He was different in that sense.
[Guest]: So he brought he brought up a perspective, which was quite unique, and I would recommend
[Guest]: to those people who are sort of listening to this to try and find some of his stuff.
[Amit Varma]: Khalid Ahmed.
[Amit Varma]: So how did you again come to the subject of the book, the Hindu Rashtra?
[Guest]: So I think we are living with it.
[Guest]: I think what happened in Gujarat in 2002, when I was there, then I'd gone back to that
[Guest]: state with with a group of people that were doing a study.
[Guest]: And at that point, it sort of occurred to me that this this was not something that we
[Guest]: should treat as being episodic, that we had a riot in 69, and then we had a riot in 84,
[Guest]: and then we had a riot in 93, and then so on.
[Guest]: This was something different.
[Guest]: And this this was going to stay with us for a very long time.
[Guest]: And it began then, I think.
[Guest]: And then I started reading some of the stuff that was that underpins the BJP and the RSS.
[Guest]: I read the stuff that the Prime Minister wrote.
[Guest]: And so it didn't occur to me that that there was a book in it.
[Guest]: But I think the last four and a half years, I think, solidified the idea that there is
[Guest]: something that is compact that can be written and explained to people.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the things that sort of struck me when, you know, when we fixed up the time
[Amit Varma]: for this episode, and I thought I should prep for it.
[Amit Varma]: And I tried to look for books on the subject of Hindutva and the intellectual traditions
[Amit Varma]: behind it and discovered a paucity of such material.
[Guest]: There's just practically no, yeah, there's not much there, unfortunately.
[Guest]: So if you look at the subcontinent, if you look at religious conservatism, almost all
[Guest]: of it at the properly intellectual level is Muslim.
[Guest]: So if we think of radical Islamist groups, Al-Qaeda and the Muslim Brotherhood, their
[Guest]: thinking is underpinned by a man who came out of Maharashtra.
[Guest]: It wasn't called that then, a Morangabad, a man called Madhudi, self-taught, but smart
[Guest]: enough to look at the modern world and build a structure that responded to the modern world
[Guest]: from the perspective of his faith.
[Guest]: We didn't have that happen from the Hindu thinkers.
[Guest]: So that's true, that radicalism and response to modernity from the perspective of a faith
[Guest]: that holds on to itself as being true, did not come to the Hindus of the subcontinent
[Guest]: as much as it came to the Muslims.
[Amit Varma]: And that's not a bad thing.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, through the course of this episode, we're going to talk about, you know, three
[Amit Varma]: of the foundational thinkers who you're going to write about in your book as well, you are
[Amit Varma]: writing about in your book as well, Savarkar, Golbarkar and Dindayal Upadhyay.
[Amit Varma]: But before that, just place this, all of this in context for me, like, you could say that
[Amit Varma]: in a sense, India is the only part of South Asia, which doesn't have something like a
[Amit Varma]: Hindu Rashtra.
[Guest]: Yeah, you're right.
[Guest]: So all the states that comprise South Asia, except for India, are in some way a majoritarian.
[Guest]: So Afghanistan, Pakistan chose to have Islamic constitutions, so did the Maldives.
[Guest]: In Lanka, Buddhism is a privilege, according to the constitution.
[Guest]: Bangladesh was part, obviously, of the Pakistan movement, but its foundational direction was
[Guest]: secular.
[Guest]: So it was Bengali nationalism rather than anything else.
[Guest]: But when they became independent, they put Bismillah-e-Rahman-e-Rahim on top of the constitution,
[Guest]: which was then removed by the court.
[Guest]: But all the nations have dabbled in it in some way, Bhutan has a king who can only come
[Guest]: from a particular faith, and he controls both the physical apparatus of the state as well
[Guest]: as the spiritual one.
[Guest]: Nepal used to be what is called a Hindu Rashtra till 2008.
[Guest]: Though, of course, it was limited in the sense that you cannot have a Hindu Rashtra.
[Guest]: And that's what my book is also about, it's not physically possible.
[Guest]: But all of these states, at some point, assumed that they should be in some way a majoritarian,
[Guest]: except for the largest country in South Asia.
[Guest]: So we started off as being unique, and we've remained unique.
[Guest]: I think both for reasons that were positive in nature, that the people who were writing
[Guest]: the laws and the constitution felt it should be that way.
[Guest]: And by default, that there is no real option for us to become majoritarian.
[Amit Varma]: And it's interesting that you say that we remain that in two ways, one by, you know,
[Amit Varma]: the elites who frame the constitution, obviously, and the other, by default, because, you know,
[Amit Varma]: one of the thinkers, you're writing a book about Dindayal Upadhyay, often complained,
[Amit Varma]: and I chatted about this in a previous episode with Shashi Tharoor, and Upadhyay used to
[Amit Varma]: complain that our constitution is again, it's been imposed on us by a bunch of elites, and
[Amit Varma]: it doesn't reflect the real India, therefore, perhaps implying that we need a constitution
[Amit Varma]: that actually does.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, and when we sort of think about the last 70 years, I mean, obviously, elites
[Amit Varma]: write constitutions everywhere, elites run policy, and they design the country.
[Amit Varma]: But it seems that at some sense, what we see in the last five years, is also that there
[Amit Varma]: is a sense of reassertion by people who are saying that no, this is a real India and you
[Amit Varma]: elites have it wrong, and you're completely irrelevant.
[Amit Varma]: And obviously, a side note to that is all the ranting that goes on against the elites
[Amit Varma]: and how the word liberal has become a pejorative and so on.
[Amit Varma]: But what do you feel about something that I consider a paradox, being a liberal of sorts
[Amit Varma]: myself, that you had a bunch of liberal elites imposing a liberal constitution on an illiberal
[Amit Varma]: country.
[Amit Varma]: So how can that imposition be liberal in itself?
[Guest]: I think it's a very good question.
[Guest]: So there are two parts to it.
[Guest]: One is the assumption made by people like Upadhyay and others that in some way, the
[Guest]: constitution represents values that are foreign or that are alien.
[Guest]: I haven't ever found a response to what else it should be.
[Guest]: Okay, I accept the fact that the Constituent Assembly of India is basically the Congress
[Guest]: Party debating itself, there's no particularly strong representation from what we would consider
[Guest]: to be conservative, upper caste elements, exerting that sort of, you know, conservatism
[Guest]: from the Hindu faith.
[Guest]: But if they were, what would they do?
[Guest]: The problem with the majoritarian Hindutva aspect is that, unlike Islam, where you can
[Guest]: have a majoritarian constitution that discriminates against the minorities, and you do have that
[Guest]: in a lot of places, including in Pakistan.
[Guest]: Problem with Hindutva constitution, the way that I have understood it based on what I've
[Guest]: read, is that it will discriminate against most Hindus.
[Guest]: If we look at the caste system, there are two things that any state can do when it decides
[Guest]: to be a majoritarian from the faith perspective.
[Guest]: One is that it tries to impose the articles of its faith.
[Guest]: The other is that it discriminates.
[Guest]: We've got the latter, and we've had it for a long time.
[Guest]: I don't think that it's the BJP that has done bad things by itself, and the people that
[Guest]: came before it were in some way different.
[Guest]: They were different in minor ways, but I think that for the most part, it's not that we were
[Guest]: going through a kind of halcyon phase, and then it's suddenly become hell.
[Guest]: That's not the way that I see it.
[Guest]: The problem is on the other side, Pakistan can say through its constitution, and it has
[Guest]: said that no non-Muslim can become the president, and they can't, because that's what the law
[Guest]: says.
[Guest]: How is it that we are going to impose the Hindu faith on a population that's 85% Hindu,
[Guest]: where you've got a third of that population is Dalit and Adivasi, about 50% is from the
[Guest]: community I come from, which is Shudra, based on the Smritis.
[Guest]: As is Modi himself.
[Guest]: Imposing the articles of faith would lead to wholesale discrimination against the majority
[Guest]: of Hindus.
[Guest]: And so it's not physically possible for us to have Hindu Rashtra in this country.
[Amit Varma]: I think if I may take a stab at answering the rhetorical question, one of the things
[Amit Varma]: that our constitution aims to do and doesn't do well enough, in my opinion, in the sense
[Amit Varma]: that it's not liberal enough, therefore, is focus on protecting individual rights, which
[Amit Varma]: it doesn't do completely enough, but it does to enough of an extent that you can call it
[Amit Varma]: a liberal constitution.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, as you pointed out in the notes that you sent me from your book about this,
[Amit Varma]: that this was something specifically that, not in the context of the constitution, but
[Amit Varma]: in terms of what a Hindu Rashtra should look like, that Golwalkar felt that there should
[Amit Varma]: be no focus on individual rights at all, that the collective took precedence over the individual.
[Amit Varma]: So if I would imagine a Hindutva constitution, and obviously I can't because I don't have
[Amit Varma]: the kind of knowledge that you do, but if I were to imagine it, I imagine one of the
[Amit Varma]: things that it would not do, which the current constitution does partially, is protect individual
[Guest]: rights.
[Guest]: Maybe that's a good way of looking at it, that you would have collective rights, but
[Guest]: what would that look like in law?
[Guest]: Would we always act in concert as a mob in terms of, would we never have a disagreement
[Guest]: within that specific schism that we would have, whether it would be Vaishnavs or you
[Amit Varma]: know, whatever else?
[Amit Varma]: I guess it would have far lesser protections for women, for example, to start with.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: And I think that that's probably what, what we are living through, that you're living
[Guest]: through a default Hindu Rashtra that discriminates against say, women going to temple because
[Guest]: they are seen as, you know, impure in some way, in terms of a practice, but that runs
[Guest]: into law.
[Guest]: The law says, I'm sorry, but you know, if you have a constitution that says equality,
[Guest]: and I think we have a pretty mediocre set of judges in our Supreme Court, but even there,
[Guest]: I think you would find that when the practice of sort of Hindu Rashtra runs into the constitution,
[Guest]: the response is usually incoherent, that it is not able to express itself because the
[Guest]: discrimination is underneath rather than completely externalized, like it is in Islam.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the things that you said when we were chatting about this episode was that
[Amit Varma]: we need to, if you're talking about the Hindu Rashtra, we also need to talk about the Pakistan
[Amit Varma]: project and what happened there and how that played out as an example of a majoritarian
[Amit Varma]: sort of state, our immediate neighbor, and I mean, we are practically the same country
[Amit Varma]: until recently.
[Guest]: Tell me a little bit about that.
[Guest]: Pakistan can be seen in a few different ways.
[Guest]: So I think the one thing that I came to learn pretty late in life was that the partition
[Guest]: of India was basically the partition of just two states, Bengal and Punjab.
[Guest]: And on the West, the transfer of citizens was almost absolute.
[Guest]: So very few non-Muslims remaining in West Punjab, very few Muslims remaining in East
[Guest]: Punjab.
[Guest]: Secondly, and I know this because of the work done by the amateur sociologists and ethnographers
[Guest]: that the Raj brought with it, who were really interested in communities and they would document
[Guest]: stuff.
[Guest]: What happened in Punjab was that the conversion of the primary mercantile castes, there were
[Guest]: two of them, Khatri and Amaroda, other than the Baniyas, who were very small, did not
[Guest]: happen outside of Sikhism.
[Guest]: So 99.9% of the people from these two communities remained Hindu or they were Sikh.
[Guest]: The 10 Sikh gurus were Khatri.
[Guest]: Partition on that front was a partition also of castes because of this, that you had a
[Guest]: fairly talented set of merchants who all moved after 47.
[Guest]: And you had, on the other hand, a very hardworking set of Jats who had been given access by the
[Guest]: British to the army.
[Guest]: After the mutiny, they were the Balwak of the British Indian army.
[Guest]: And they had been given lands and so on.
[Guest]: So you've got this fairly martial population in charge of a large part of Pakistan, more
[Guest]: than 50% of what is today Pakistan and what used to be West Pakistan is Punjabi speaking.
[Guest]: So you had a dominant martial caste there in charge of the population without the leavening
[Guest]: of the mercantilism of the Khatri and the Arora Punjabis.
[Guest]: To my mind that had a significant effect in the way that the country evolved and has continued
[Guest]: to evolve.
[Guest]: I think the militaristic spirit that it shows, the love of the army despite being ruled by
[Guest]: it for most of its post-1947 period speaks to that.
[Guest]: I think there is some romance to the way that they view the military.
[Guest]: The Pakistan project, I think, collapsed from the modernist point of view with the death
[Guest]: of Jinnah where in his person, there was still some hope that they were going to some kind
[Guest]: of Turkey type state which would.
[Guest]: So Turkey in the 20s, romanized the alphabet, banned the fairs.
[Guest]: And so that was seen as a sign of modernity and there were suits and they had guns and
[Guest]: so on.
[Guest]: And Jinnah was quite sort of enamored of Hamata Turk.
[Guest]: He's named only two books that he's read.
[Guest]: I translated a very short interview he did in Gujarati in the 1920s.
[Guest]: And the two books that he's read, one is The Count of Monte Cristo and the other is a book
[Guest]: called A Gray Wolf by this man called H.C.
[Guest]: Armstrong who had profiled Kamala Tatuk.
[Guest]: Were these his favorite books or do you think they were?
[Guest]: I don't think he was well read.
[Guest]: He's a beautiful writer.
[Guest]: I wish I hadn't spent as much money on the Jinnah papers as I have because they're rubbish.
[Guest]: But his, the way that he spoke and wrote is manifestly superior to what people of my generation
[Guest]: who've studied English and you know, we are not there.
[Guest]: He spoke and wrote it really well.
[Guest]: He had a sort of felicity for the language.
[Guest]: And he was an accomplished lawyer.
[Guest]: He was a very good advocate.
[Guest]: He was not a particularly good lawyer.
[Guest]: I think the difference in that is that he was very good at taking a brief and then being
[Guest]: able to represent it before a judge rather than doing the hard work of finding the details
[Guest]: out and so on.
[Guest]: So he was seen as a phenomenal advocate, but not that good a lawyer.
[Guest]: So he dies a few months after partition as does Gandhi.
[Guest]: And in the weeks up to partition, Jinnah has made statements that suggest that the constitution
[Guest]: of Pakistan, he's careful to say that it is the work of the constituent assembly and not
[Guest]: his own.
[Guest]: But he says enough to suggest that it would have some sort of alignment with the faith.
[Guest]: Then just four days before partition, he gives a speech to the, he speaks to the constituent
[Guest]: assembly where he says things like in a post-independence Pakistan, Hindus will be free to go to their
[Guest]: temples and so on.
[Guest]: And he says that the state is not likely at some point in the future to look on citizens
[Guest]: through the prism of faith, that they will just be Pakistanis.
[Guest]: So that suggested to people later that he was trying to speak of a secular state, but
[Guest]: he never used that word secular.
[Guest]: And he left enough sort of evidence here and there for us to assume that he would be okay
[Guest]: with the way that the Pakistani constitution, constitutions, I should say they have three
[Guest]: of them turned out.
[Guest]: And but he dies, he's got TB just before a partition, his doctor who's a Parsi man from
[Guest]: Bombay doesn't tell anybody.
[Guest]: And six months after he dies, the Pakistani constituent assembly, which has a fairly large
[Guest]: composition of Bengali Hindus from East Pakistan, debate, they start their discussions on what
[Guest]: the constitution should be.
[Guest]: And Liaquat Ali Khan, who's this North Indian kind of royalty type figure, Sunni, Jinnah
[Guest]: was a Gujarati from a very small community called the Seven Arshiyas, the Khojas.
[Guest]: And he had actually converted out of it at one point.
[Guest]: Liaquat proposed something called the objective resolution, which was a sort of a preamble.
[Guest]: And Pakistan, according to that, a preamble would be an Islamic state, where sovereignty
[Guest]: belonged to Allah.
[Guest]: But it would be given interest to the people of Pakistan.
[Guest]: And you would have democracy, you would have freedom, you would have tolerance, you would
[Guest]: have justice, you would have all of that.
[Guest]: But you would have all of these as enunciated by Islam.
[Guest]: And this naturally alarmed the Hindus in the Pakistani constituent assembly.
[Guest]: And there's a series of very learned interventions that they made.
[Guest]: And it's worth reading them.
[Guest]: And I hope to reproduce much of that in my book.
[Guest]: Saying that this was not what Jinnah had promised, that this was vague, they were going into
[Guest]: a space which no other nation had gone through before.
[Guest]: Pakistan and Israel pretty much at the same time determined that they're going to be states
[Guest]: that have a faith based component in the constitution.
[Guest]: So Jewish state there and you've got the Muslim state here.
[Guest]: But these words as enunciated by Islam didn't really mean much specifically.
[Guest]: Islam itself broke into two right at the beginning.
[Guest]: Not because of a theological dispute, but because of a political dispute who should
[Guest]: succeed the prophet.
[Guest]: And so there was no real means of saying what Islamic democracy was, what was Islamic equality.
[Guest]: Being a desert people, they had the primary form of asset with the family was actually
[Guest]: cattle, easy to divide.
[Guest]: And so at a time in the world, 1400 years ago, when women did not have much by way of
[Guest]: rights, the Prophet of Islam said that a daughter should inherit one half of what the son gets.
[Guest]: And this was great for that time, but you can't have the same law after 1400 years.
[Guest]: What happened was in the interpretations that they gave these very basic sentences, Pakistan
[Guest]: applied them across law.
[Guest]: So Pakistan started off and it still has the same IPC that we do.
[Guest]: So they know what 420 means, for example, they know what 153A means.
[Guest]: Or 124A sedition is right there.
[Guest]: They've tweaked some of the punishments to make them harsher, especially for blasphemy
[Guest]: in the 80s.
[Guest]: But so they started off with the same laws, but they thought that they should Islamize
[Guest]: the state in some way.
[Guest]: And one way of doing that was to try and use a precepts and use some statements from 1400
[Guest]: years ago and try and apply them to the modern world, which doesn't work.
[Guest]: So they had this constitution that came out in the 50s.
[Guest]: Almost immediately, the army took over and kept power for a decade.
[Guest]: The army had its own constitution.
[Guest]: The army was tough on East Pakistan, Jinnah wanted to impose Urdu on the whole, he didn't
[Guest]: speak it himself, couldn't read it.
[Guest]: He spoke Gujarati and he spoke it really well.
[Guest]: I've translated that interview that I told you about.
[Guest]: His writing is really polished and he knows the language.
[Guest]: And I'm sure being in South Bombay, the tough that he was, that would have been the primary
[Guest]: language even in court for many decades after a partition.
[Guest]: If you look at lawyers like Chagla or whoever else, a lot of the heavyweights in the Indian
[Guest]: judiciary were Parsis, Muslims, Hindus who came out of the Bombay High Court.
[Guest]: So they tried to adapt to a modern constitution, things that they believe they should be doing
[Guest]: out of a sense of piety.
[Guest]: Nobody's doing this to persecute people.
[Guest]: The fact is that when they wrote the objectives resolution, the Muslims were probably confident
[Guest]: that they were not going to produce a state that was going to in any way discriminate.
[Guest]: But that is what it did.
[Guest]: And they were never happy with it.
[Guest]: The problem is with a utopian state or a constitution that aims to take you to a state that is in
[Guest]: some way a utopia.
[Guest]: It never works.
[Guest]: So Pakistan had to go through one constitution in the 50s, another one in the 60s.
[Guest]: The country broke.
[Guest]: I was talking about Jinnah wanting to impose this language on the Bangladeshis, which they
[Guest]: didn't want.
[Guest]: And there were more of them, in fact, there were more of them.
[Guest]: And if things remain the way they are, for the first time in the history of the subcontinent,
[Guest]: in two or three years, the Bangladesh per capita income will outstrip that of Pakistan,
[Guest]: which is remarkable for a country that was thought to be a basket case only 40 years
[Guest]: ago.
[Guest]: So Bangladesh secedes with help from India and the country breaks up.
[Guest]: And there's a third constitution, 1973, written by the PPP under Bhutto.
[Guest]: And that's the one that's remained in some form today.
[Guest]: But over time, the discrimination has been written in.
[Guest]: So you've got, for example, no president or prime minister can be a non-Muslim.
[Guest]: You've got the law on a property, Zia ul Haq comes and extends that to rape.
[Guest]: So a woman's testimony is seen to be worth only half a man's.
[Guest]: And if a man is accused of rape by a woman, she must produce two male witnesses to the
[Guest]: act of rape.
[Guest]: And if she cannot do that, she's accused of fornication and jailed.
[Guest]: And this is what actually happened.
[Guest]: No party was able to escape it once it came on to the books.
[Guest]: Once you had a written constitution that demanded that the faith be in some way imposed so that
[Guest]: people could benefit from the blessings of living in a faithful country.
[Guest]: It didn't stop.
[Guest]: The PPP was a liberal socialist parties.
[Guest]: They are the ones that changed the constitution in 1974.
[Guest]: The Bhutto apostatized this community called the Ahmadis.
[Guest]: And even today, Pakistani passport holders must, in writing, disown membership of that
[Guest]: community.
[Guest]: Why?
[Guest]: There was a riot in the 50s.
[Guest]: This is a community that comes out of Punjab.
[Guest]: There are many of them here in India as well.
[Guest]: So we think of Islam in India as being sort of very monotheistic, but it's not really
[Guest]: that.
[Guest]: There's lots of saints, just like St. Paul came and converted the polytheistic Romans
[Guest]: into Christians by giving them saints, you know, you could go and worship whoever you
[Guest]: wanted to, but you would now call them a saint and they would be a sort of intercessor between
[Guest]: you and God.
[Guest]: Islam's done the same thing.
[Guest]: More people pray at shrines in Lahore or in Ajmer than have ever gone to Mecca.
[Guest]: And that's the way it is.
[Guest]: That is the subcontinent's faith.
[Guest]: It's very powerfully colored with mysticism and the power of dead people.
[Guest]: So one of these sects in Punjab, one of these men has visions and Islam has been quite firm
[Guest]: in its belief that Muhammad is the last of the line of prophets that starts with Adam,
[Guest]: that he's the first and he's the last.
[Guest]: And anyone having visions then becomes a sort of threat.
[Guest]: And therefore, there was some problem with the, it's a fairly recent community, it's
[Guest]: not that old, late 19th century, I think.
[Guest]: There were some riots in Pakistani Punjab in the 50s on the same issue.
[Guest]: And then rather than surrender the street to mobs that wanted violence on this, Bhutto
[Guest]: just sort of did the easy thing and rewrote the law.
[Guest]: That's happened in a lot of places with the blasphemy law.
[Guest]: So as I said, Pakistan's got exactly the same set of laws that we have written by Macaulay
[Guest]: in the 1860s.
[Guest]: And blasphemy was punishable by up to three years in jail.
[Guest]: Almost nobody blasphemed.
[Guest]: There were only eight cases of blasphemy registered before 1980 in India and Pakistan combined
[Guest]: for a law that's like more than a hundred years old.
[Guest]: So it's not that kind of place.
[Guest]: I think the veneration of faith is very high in our part.
[Guest]: So it's very unlikely that you'll find somebody deliberately blaspheming.
[Guest]: And the judiciary was quite tolerant.
[Guest]: So when you had somebody like Naikar in the South breaking idols of Ganesha in public,
[Guest]: it was seen as something that he had the right to do.
[Guest]: We can't do it anymore, obviously, in this country.
[Guest]: But in Pakistan, what happened was they changed it to death, immediately the number of cases
[Guest]: of blasphemy, especially against non-Muslims shot up to over a thousand.
[Guest]: It was a tool to be used against people you didn't like for whatever reason, it could
[Guest]: be reasons of faith, it could be reasons of property, which it often was.
[Guest]: But it gave the law, the anger of society.
[Guest]: And I think that that's what usually happens when you have a majoritarian state in South
[Guest]: Asia, that there is an undercurrent, and it becomes more powerful.
[Guest]: And it expresses itself through violence, when you turn it into law.
[Amit Varma]: So is the whole Pakistan project, a cautionary tale of sorts for those in India who see the
[Guest]: specter of a Hindu rush?
[Guest]: I think so.
[Guest]: I think that we ought to look at where majoritarianism took Pakistan, not just from the point of
[Guest]: view of the constitution.
[Guest]: Like I said, they're on the third constitution or fifth, if you really look at it, the kind
[Guest]: of mauling that Zia did in the 80s.
[Guest]: And then you know, you had people like Musharraf, who was there for almost a decade.
[Guest]: Nothing good comes of it.
[Guest]: The idea that our constitution is in some way foreign, or the values that it talks about
[Guest]: equality, or secularism, or whatever is foreign is bogus.
[Guest]: And these are not values that are owned by any one nation or any one race.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, my point is, even if they say originated with the Enlightenment and came to us from
[Amit Varma]: there, what difference does it make now?
[Guest]: It does make a difference.
[Guest]: You know, the Greeks really respected India, Pythagoras, who they credit as being the origin
[Guest]: of the seven note scale in music, and you know, we are familiar with the theorem, was
[Guest]: actually a vegetarian because he came to India and picked it up with him.
[Guest]: That's what the Greeks believe.
[Guest]: This is not something that this is not a Tejo Mahalai kind of thing, you know, if you read
[Guest]: Plato and Socrates and from that period, immense respect for what the East had.
[Guest]: And I don't think there is any one moment in history where any one community or nation
[Guest]: says that we've, you know, put this up from zero, democracy is just a word.
[Guest]: But I'm saying that if you are going to lead a group of people, there's going to be pushback
[Guest]: from that group, they would want a stake in power.
[Guest]: That's the way the human being is, we're not the sort of people who can be herded into
[Guest]: groups and then told what to do.
[Guest]: And so even though it might be seen as an external idea, I don't think it is I don't
[Guest]: think the liberties, you know, particularly the preserve of the West and certainly not
[Amit Varma]: that that'll be enlightenment.
[Amit Varma]: We'll take a quick commercial break, and we'll come back to talk about the intellectual gurus
[Amit Varma]: of Hindutva as it were.
[Unknown]: Hello, everybody, welcome to another awesome week on the IBM podcast.
[Unknown]: If you're not following us on social media, please make sure that you do we're IBM podcast
[Unknown]: on Facebook, Twitter and Instagram.
[Unknown]: So just wanted to make a note for everybody, we do have this new Alexa skill that we've
[Unknown]: created for Cyrus says if you have an Alexa, please say play Cyrus says and you should
[Unknown]: be able to listen to the podcast on the Alexa from now on.
[Unknown]: Speaking of Cyrus says this week Cyrus is joined by Dr. Vishakha Shivdasani, they talk
[Unknown]: about healthy eating and nutrition and Vishakha clears Cyrus's confusion about the professions
[Unknown]: of nutritionist, dietician, doctors and health coaches.
[Unknown]: This week on Geekfruit, Tejas and Dinka bring on producer Zoya to discuss Interstellar and
[Unknown]: the Dark Knight trilogy and rank the onscreen portrayals of Batman on the sponge podcast
[Unknown]: Ambiparmeshwaran talks about what makes for a great client and agency relationship and
[Unknown]: how not to get caught in intra company crossfires.
[Unknown]: On MF101, Anupam talks to Manish Dungy, co-CIO of Dett and Aditya Bella Sun Life Mutual Fund
[Unknown]: about Dett Mutual Funds, its characteristics and current scenarios.
[Unknown]: We've launched a brand new sports show called What a Player where the hosts give you insights
[Unknown]: about the latest games, scores and strategies.
[Unknown]: Do check it out for updates about the ongoing T20 Cricket League.
[Unknown]: New episodes are out every morning.
[Unknown]: This week on Dating is Garbage, our hosts invite the first couple on the show, Naveen
[Unknown]: Narona and Abhishek Tundel to talk about the green flags of dating.
[Unknown]: On Crocs Tales, Anand Sivakumara narrates tales of friendship, dating and love all
[Unknown]: centered around the phrase, kuch meetha ho jaye.
[Unknown]: This week on our Kannada podcast Thale Arate, CV Madhukar discusses how philanthropy and
[Unknown]: impact investing can make a difference in our society.
[Unknown]: And with that, let's get on with your show.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I'm chatting with Aakar Patel about his forthcoming book on the Hindu Rashtra by which I guess
[Amit Varma]: in a sense you mean Hindutva.
[Amit Varma]: And that's again a term coined by Vinayak Savarkar, you know, the first of the thinkers
[Guest]: you focus on.
[Guest]: Yeah, it's a new word.
[Guest]: I don't think it occurs in the Smritis, it doesn't occur in the Vedas, there's no reference
[Guest]: to it.
[Guest]: But the community of people who are Hindutva followers are very possessive about that word.
[Guest]: Savarkar definitely was.
[Guest]: He was very keen to show that its origins were not in some way Muslim in nature.
[Guest]: This might have been a debate when he was writing the book in the 20s, certainly it's
[Guest]: not now.
[Guest]: But he felt that the Hindu faith ought to own the word and the etymology of the word
[Guest]: from Sindhu and so on.
[Guest]: So we don't have any particular references to Hindutva till he writes his book in the
[Guest]: 20s.
[Guest]: He's a young man at that point, he's in jail and this is still pre-1947 India.
[Guest]: So his concern is not what the relationship of the state is with Hindutva.
[Guest]: That is not his concern.
[Guest]: I think his primary objective is to his definition and he's trying to construct a nation which
[Guest]: is whole, which is intact and which is pure.
[Guest]: And he finds that idea in the word Hindu, which to him means two things.
[Guest]: It means the land in which the Hindus live, beginning at the Indus and moving east.
[Guest]: And secondly, what he calls the faiths that are of this land.
[Guest]: So he includes Jainism, he includes Sikhism, includes Buddhism.
[Guest]: He excludes Islam, excludes Christianity, but includes atheists who are Hindu.
[Guest]: So maybe he hasn't thought it through fully, but there are some contradictions there that
[Guest]: remain.
[Guest]: But his idea was to develop a theory of nationhood.
[Guest]: This is a period when Europe's going through a lot of that sort of thinking itself.
[Guest]: And he arrives at this construct, which he calls Hindutva.
[Amit Varma]: And in fact, reading his book, it struck me that more than half of it seemed to be about
[Amit Varma]: semantics and about just the term Hindutva and Hinduism and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And it's interesting why he objected to the term Hinduism, which he objects to, which
[Amit Varma]: he says that is because, you know, an ism means a body of beliefs.
[Guest]: And he wanted a word which would encompass a lot more.
[Guest]: Yeah, you're right.
[Guest]: He wanted a word that was bigger than sort of Hinduism.
[Guest]: And he comes to the word Hindutva, which he says is a word of common usage, which I find
[Guest]: hard to believe because it's not one even now.
[Guest]: I mean, I don't know how many people knew the word in the 1920s.
[Guest]: But he's probably the best read of the Hindutva writers.
[Guest]: He's got access to a British education.
[Guest]: He's multilingual properly.
[Guest]: He writes a pretty good English.
[Guest]: I think that he would he would stand out as a writer.
[Guest]: If he wrote columns today, he has a sense of wordplay, better read and I think a better
[Guest]: thinker than the people who came after him.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: And there's an interesting quote from his book about the word Hindu.
[Amit Varma]: I'll just read it out, quote, the reason that explains why the term Hindu cannot be synonymous
[Amit Varma]: with Bharatiya or Hindi, which was used as an epithet in some senses, which synonymous
[Amit Varma]: with Bharatiya or Hindi or mean an Indian only naturally introduces us to the second
[Amit Varma]: essential implication of that term.
[Amit Varma]: The Hindus are not merely the citizens of the Indian state because they are united not
[Amit Varma]: only by the bonds of love they bear to a common motherland, but also by the bonds of a common
[Amit Varma]: blood.
[Amit Varma]: They are not only a nation, but also a race slash jati.
[Amit Varma]: The word jati derived from the root jain to produce means a brotherhood, a race determined
[Amit Varma]: by a common origin, possessing a common blood.
[Amit Varma]: All Hindus claim to have in their veins the blood of the mighty race incorporated with
[Amit Varma]: and descended from the Vedic fathers, the Sindhu, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And it seemed to me in the book that while defining Hindus and Hindutva, he is relying
[Amit Varma]: a lot on his sense of history, which we now know today to be completely false.
[Guest]: Yeah, yeah, that's it would be hard to break it to the old man what what the recent discoveries
[Guest]: in I had an episode recently with Tony Joseph and his great books.
[Unknown]: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
[Guest]: No, they didn't know that then.
[Guest]: The other thing is that he's writing in the early 20s.
[Guest]: And I think it's 1926, if I'm not mistaken, when a Mohenjo-Daro is discovered.
[Guest]: So India doesn't know of the existence of Amindas Valley civilization till the mid 20s.
[Guest]: And it's in this period that he's writing.
[Guest]: So he's coming up with he's he's full of romance, you know, we are this great culture, but he
[Guest]: probably has to wait at the traffic light while the British guy gets access first and
[Guest]: you probably excluded from pubs in London.
[Guest]: He was in London for a bit.
[Guest]: So he that that would have had played fairly heavily on on him and he's he's writing with
[Guest]: that background.
[Guest]: And it should be understood that a sense of grandioseness in what he's trying to be a
[Guest]: part of is inbuilt into that book.
[Guest]: So yeah, it doesn't make for that good a read today.
[Guest]: Unless you're looking at it purely from the academic point of view.
[Guest]: It's not an easy read, because it's, it's a fairly slim work.
[Guest]: It's about 50 pages.
[Guest]: But you would finish it and ask what what's his point, because there's no real point at
[Guest]: almost a semantic point.
[Guest]: Yeah, yeah, he's one of the first guys to say that Hindus are a nation, something that
[Guest]: the Muslim League would say with much more vehemence later.
[Guest]: But he's clear to his mind that we are a different nation from the Muslims.
[Guest]: And even within that one nation of Hindus, if you, for example, are atheist and have
[Guest]: no interest at all, in anything that constitutes the Hindu faith, even then, you are a respected
[Amit Varma]: member of that Hindu nation, whereas
[Amit Varma]: How he sort of seems to define this sort of, you know, Hinduism as sort of a cultural construct
[Amit Varma]: or whatever, and why it excludes Muslims seems to be that one thing all Hindus have in common
[Amit Varma]: Hindus, quote, unquote, is that they bear allegiance to one motherland, which is, you
[Amit Varma]: know, India, of course, doesn't exist, but that sort of area and his claim is that Muslims
[Guest]: don't and therefore they're outside of it.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So he says that there are three tests.
[Guest]: One is that you come from this part of the world.
[Guest]: So Hindus do and Muslims do and Sikhs do and you know, Christians do and they all do which
[Guest]: is fine.
[Guest]: And he says it's fine.
[Guest]: The other is bonds of blood, which he says that we all share, including those who are
[Guest]: not not Hindus, because we've got we come from a parentage and a ancestry that's been
[Guest]: here for a long time.
[Guest]: So that's so that's fine.
[Guest]: That's the that's the second one.
[Guest]: The third one is the common culture bit, which you just spoke about that Hindus have a common
[Guest]: culture according to him, Raksha Bandhan, Diwali.
[Guest]: Such things are what constitute Hindu culture to his mind, language, food, music, these
[Guest]: are not cultural aspects and he doesn't write about them.
[Guest]: He has no interest in them.
[Guest]: I think this is something that that carries through into Hindu thinkers, there is no interest
[Guest]: at all in what Hindu high culture is or what it should be.
[Guest]: They don't care whether it exists at all.
[Guest]: They don't write about it in any sense.
[Amit Varma]: And a lot of it is very symbiotic with the Islamic high culture and so on, you know.
[Guest]: So yeah, the thing is that music, it's not that easy to be able to separate it by faith,
[Guest]: you know, you've got in Europe, the high culture music, which is vocal is almost entirely in
[Guest]: a language that 90% of Europe doesn't speak Italian, a lot of the music is composed by
[Guest]: a group of people who are seen as mechanical and you know, the Germans, but they've got
[Guest]: Mozart and they've got Beethoven and so on.
[Guest]: It's not easy to say that this is this culture that we have and your culture is separate
[Guest]: and then, you know, the only sort of intercourse that one culture has with another in the Savarkar
[Guest]: view is through war, is through violence.
[Amit Varma]: That's not the way the world works, you know.
[Amit Varma]: And do you think it's not coincidental, but telling that a lot of these Hindutva ideologues
[Amit Varma]: weren't actually into high culture because you imagine that people who are tuned into
[Amit Varma]: culture in that sense will be less likely to have such an exclusionary view of the world.
[Guest]: I hope what you're saying is right.
[Guest]: It sounds nice.
[Guest]: I don't know if that's the case, though, it is certainly true that you it's very difficult.
[Guest]: If you've properly studied Hindustani music, to be a bigot, I'll give you an example.
[Guest]: A lot of the compositions I used to have, I used to learn how to sing kirana gharana
[Guest]: and about 90% of the compositions that that are sung by that gharana are the work of a
[Guest]: man called Sadarang, who composed in the time of Mohammed Shah Rangeela.
[Guest]: Even if you've got something like Raag Shankara, and it's an ode to Shiva, it's written by
[Guest]: that man and he puts his name in it.
[Guest]: So and if you hear Bhimsen Joshi sing it, there's a lovely version of his shown on Doordarshan
[Guest]: that's there on YouTube, where he's singing a Shankara and the name of the author, Niyamat
[Guest]: Khan Sadarang, that's his name is there in that song.
[Guest]: All his songs, he would put his name in, you know, it's tough after that to be able to
[Guest]: be very rigid in the way that one looks at either one's own faith or somebody else's.
[Guest]: But as I said, you would find very little interest in any form of high culture of the
[Guest]: Hindu, what we would look at as being Indian or Hindu high culture within the people who
[Guest]: tend to push Hindutva, whether it's food, music, anything dance, it's not there.
[Guest]: And what is Savarkar's approach to caste?
[Guest]: One thing that becomes clear when one reads these people is all of them are Brahmin.
[Guest]: So the three names that you took are all Brahmin.
[Guest]: I'm not saying that there are no non-Brahmin who have contributed to this, I'm sure there
[Guest]: are.
[Guest]: But the corpus is primarily Brahmin.
[Guest]: And so, if you look at the RSS and the people who headed it, except for one man who is a
[Guest]: Thakur, who was away for a very brief period, a Sarsangachalak, all of them are a Brahmin
[Guest]: and most of them are Marathi Brahmins.
[Guest]: So you have that narrowness built into the thinking, which has continued and it is entirely
[Guest]: absent of what we would look at as being multicultural Indian today, which we take for granted, you
[Guest]: know, you would have a figure like Shah Rukh Khan or whatever, and it's not really strange.
[Guest]: But it was strange, I think, to them, in the 20s, when they were thinking this up, the
[Guest]: levels of sort of intercourse between them and the other was very low.
[Guest]: And there are mistakes, factual errors that they make in the book, including Savarkar,
[Guest]: because he doesn't really know what he's talking about when he's writing about Islam.
[Amit Varma]: And what about caste?
[Amit Varma]: There's an interesting quote by Savarkar, which I was unable to parse, but I'll just
[Amit Varma]: read it out for you, which is, quote, all that the caste system has done is to regulate
[Amit Varma]: its noble blood on lines believed and on the whole rightly believed by our saintly and
[Amit Varma]: patriotic lawgivers and kings to contribute most to fertilize and enrich all that was
[Amit Varma]: barren and poor, without famishing and debasing, all that was flourishing and nobly endowed,
[Unknown]: stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And this is both very verbose, and he's not saying anything at all.
[Guest]: That particular paragraph needs to be unpicked, I think.
[Guest]: So what he's saying is, all of them support what is called varnashram, which is a division
[Guest]: of society by caste, they don't have any problem with it, they think it's a good thing.
[Guest]: And we can talk about Golwalkar and why he thought it was a great thing.
[Guest]: But Savarkar believes that caste is beneficial.
[Guest]: And he's, I think, to my mind, the first person to theorize this.
[Guest]: He says that he has a problem with Buddhism.
[Guest]: And he says that India became vulnerable because Buddhism took away caste from the subcontinent.
[Guest]: And Afghanistan becomes Muslim, because it remains Buddhist.
[Guest]: But India, because it reverts to Hinduism and caste, is able to save itself from being
[Guest]: fully Muslim.
[Guest]: So he thinks that caste has a positive contribution to make here.
[Guest]: He and Golwalkar both thought that restricting the gene pool was a good thing.
[Guest]: And that Brahmins had something special, which they could continue having, if they bred amongst
[Guest]: themselves.
[Guest]: And they could pass on if they were to sort of impregnate the non-Brahmin, that's what
[Guest]: that long line always says.
[Guest]: Savarkar also thought that, I don't know if he thought this, but he certainly wrote it,
[Guest]: that caste was not fully endogamous or rigid, that it was permissible in times before ours
[Guest]: for people to marry up or down.
[Guest]: And he has these Sanskritic words that he uses, Anulom and so on.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, he has a line here where he says, quote, a Hindu marrying a Hindu may lose his
[Guest]: caste but not his Hindutva.
[Guest]: So he was not a believer himself.
[Guest]: So far as I know, he was not a particularly devout person.
[Guest]: He was defined more by his antipathy than his faith.
[Guest]: But I think he's the source of this argument that we have.
[Guest]: He and maybe Vivekananda, that caste is not all bad.
[Guest]: There was a period in our history when you could sort of intermarry and then that was
[Guest]: fine.
[Guest]: And then it's just a division of labor.
[Guest]: It's not really discrimination.
[Guest]: I think these are views that the middle class today would hold.
[Guest]: And I think they come to us in the middle class through these two men in the main.
[Guest]: Golwalkar had a very outrageous view on this.
[Guest]: And it's really surprising to me that though he's referred to as being the Guruji of the
[Guest]: Sangh and so on, these things haven't been made as prominent as they should have been.
[Guest]: Golwalkar says that caste is good because in the ideal caste based society, access to
[Guest]: money is completely separated from access to power.
[Guest]: Because the Vaish deal with commerce and the Kshatriyas deal with the kingdom and authority.
[Guest]: And that's great.
[Amit Varma]: So you don't have a mix.
[Guest]: It's like a separation of powers, a separation of power.
[Guest]: And he adds that there is a selfless community on top of them that has no skin in the game,
[Guest]: but is able to sort of guide and advise on how to run the whole state.
[Guest]: And these are the Brahmins, obviously.
[Guest]: And he says that this is what a good state should be like.
[Guest]: And it's really strange to come upon him such a statement randomly in his work.
[Guest]: He's written one book called A Bunch of Thoughts and it's to be as old as one is and not have
[Guest]: had known that this is what the Hindutva thought is for such a long period to me is slightly
[Guest]: strange.
[Guest]: We don't have access in our schools to this kind of material, but we should.
[Amit Varma]: And a related question I was saving for later, but we'll come back to Savarkar while I bring
[Amit Varma]: it up now is that in a lot of the rhetoric of all of these guys, they actually talk about
[Amit Varma]: hey, we are inclusive, we are not exclusionary, you know, for example, the RSS being called
[Amit Varma]: the Rashtriya Sevak Sangh and not the Hindu Sevak Sangh, and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And a lot of that rhetoric actually percolates down to the present day.
[Amit Varma]: How much of that rhetoric do you think is a sort of genuine belief and how much of it
[Amit Varma]: is strategic?
[Guest]: I would say most of it is the latter.
[Guest]: It's a strategy where you are trying to form.
[Guest]: So to the RSS, the nation and the faith have never been separate.
[Guest]: India is a nation and India is a nation of Hindus and Hindus are a nation.
[Guest]: And so there was a debate on what to call the RSS and Gulwalkar says that at some point
[Guest]: somebody suggested, you know, Hindu Swayam Sevak Sangh and Hedgewar says that no, that
[Guest]: there is no difference between India and Hindu.
[Guest]: And why should we call ourselves a Hindu Swayam Sevak Sangh because then we will only be one
[Guest]: of many.
[Guest]: We don't represent Hindu RSS, we represent India in total.
[Guest]: And that is what and that I think is the strategy.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, that's a sentiment you see even to the present day where if you're anti-Modi,
[Amit Varma]: you're anti-national.
[Guest]: Yeah, very true.
[Guest]: If we've been surprised by the fact that this has become so externalized now, it's been
[Guest]: there in their writing and their books for a long time.
[Amit Varma]: And there's another quote of Savarkar I picked out, which reminded me so much of the present
[Amit Varma]: times.
[Amit Varma]: We just have to replace some words, which is, quote, in times of conflict, nations do
[Amit Varma]: lose their balance of mind.
[Amit Varma]: And if the Persians or others once understood by the word Hindu a thief or black man alone,
[Amit Varma]: and let them remember that the word Mohammedan too, was not always mentioned to denote any
[Amit Varma]: very enviable type of mankind by the Hindus either, to call a man a Musalman or better
[Amit Varma]: still a Musanda was worse than calling him a brute, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And it's very interesting that even in current times, while he's speaking of words like Hindu
[Amit Varma]: and Musalman used as pejoratives, you find the same thing happening today when it comes
[Amit Varma]: to liberals.
[Guest]: Yeah, this what you just read out is a fairly strange part of his book, I couldn't make
[Guest]: sense of it.
[Guest]: But I think that in the 20s, this might have been a big thing, or at least a big thing
[Guest]: in the circles that he moved around it.
[Guest]: So what Savarkar is trying to do is to show that the word Hindu is in some is even if
[Guest]: it is used as a word of abuse by the Muslim, and I can't think of any reason why it should
[Guest]: be.
[Guest]: We can give it back to you as well.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: And how long that phase lasted in the part of the world that he was in where the word
[Guest]: Hindu was seen as a word of abuse, I don't know, but it takes up too much space in that
[Guest]: work of his.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: And you're right.
[Guest]: I think that the word liberal, the word secular also in in Gujarat is seen as being colored
[Guest]: in a particular way.
[Guest]: So the word secular means pro Muslim, and by default, it means anti Hindu.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, one of the bizarre things I found was earlier the BJP would criticize the Congress
[Amit Varma]: for being pseudo secular, by which would assume that if that is a criticism, then they are
[Amit Varma]: criticizing the Congress for not being truly, truly secular, but being pseudo secular.
[Amit Varma]: But how do you criticize people for being both pseudo secular and secular as if both
[Amit Varma]: things are bad?
[Guest]: Yeah, that the pseudo secular debate is gone.
[Guest]: Now, the one thing to be said about Hindutva, I think that it is honest, it owns its prejudices
[Guest]: and doesn't hide in the way that Congress secularism did.
[Guest]: In Madhya Pradesh, in Congress run Madhya Pradesh, you could be charged under the NSA
[Guest]: for the allegation of cow slaughter.
[Guest]: So it's remarkable that they've just yanked the polity so quickly and so far that these
[Guest]: things have become meaningless, you know, pseudo secular.
[Guest]: It's, it is certainly true that in terms of terminology, the, the BJP doesn't back away
[Guest]: from owning any of the things that you might accuse it of being, they will only justify
[Amit Varma]: it.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: And many of Savarkar's intellectual influences or political influences, rather, you know,
[Amit Varma]: as various people have pointed out, came from Europe from the fascists from Mussolini and
[Amit Varma]: from Hitler.
[Amit Varma]: So almost as he was at pains to make the case that Hinduism was something very small and
[Amit Varma]: Hindutva was broader than that.
[Amit Varma]: What it seems was that it's the other way around.
[Amit Varma]: Hindutva was a subset where he used ideas in Hinduism to propagate a philosophy which
[Amit Varma]: wasn't really Indian to begin with, which was actually imported from there.
[Guest]: No, very true, very true.
[Guest]: So he's writing in the period just after the unification of Italy and he names I think
[Guest]: either Mazzini or Garibaldi or maybe both in the book.
[Guest]: His ideas are not those that have been sent down the ages.
[Guest]: He's writing about something new.
[Guest]: He's a subject in a Raj system with almost no power, sidelined and marginalized, but
[Guest]: a smart man.
[Guest]: And he's trying to make sense of the world.
[Guest]: And he's trying to do it in a way that gives himself respect and the community and the
[Guest]: people and the nation that he comes from a respect.
[Guest]: But he does it in a way that sort of ultimately damages that same nation.
[Amit Varma]: Moving on from Savarkar now to Golgalkar, tell me a little bit about Golgalkar.
[Guest]: He's the second Sarasanga Chalak of the RSS, which is formed in 1925 by this man in Nagpur
[Guest]: and who dies in 1940, and it is in the kind of mystical tradition, which the Muslims also
[Guest]: have, you know, a Piro Murshid, which is what they call it, you tend to anoint your successor.
[Guest]: And the story is that Golgalkar, who was fairly young, had translated a work into English.
[Guest]: He was reasonably bilingual.
[Guest]: I have no record or I have no access to his language in some, but it seems like he knew
[Guest]: a fair bit of English.
[Guest]: And he translates this work, which is titled We or Our Nationhood defined.
[Guest]: And that brings him into prominence for some reason, I don't know what it is.
[Guest]: And on dying, to the surprise of many, he is made the head of the RSS on the dying of
[Guest]: the first head.
[Guest]: He dies in 1940, and he goes through partition.
[Guest]: He's a fairly young man then, he's not particularly old, he's just in his late 30s.
[Guest]: And he dies in 73.
[Guest]: So he's headed the RSS from a period, which was before independence, through the violence
[Guest]: of partition, the constitution, through the wars with China and with Pakistan.
[Guest]: And of course, the partition of Pakistan later in 71, 72, and then he dies the year after
[Guest]: that.
[Guest]: So he's seen a fair bit.
[Guest]: He's also the man who actually makes it a national organization, he's able to reduce
[Guest]: the idea of the shakha down to a simple form, very basic activity, raising the flag, wearing
[Guest]: shorts if you have the shorts, coming and doing your prayers and playing kabaddi, playing
[Guest]: games with sticks, and you go back after that, there's nothing else, there's no sort of intellectual
[Guest]: content.
[Guest]: But he's figured out that this is an easy thing to replicate.
[Guest]: And it's true.
[Guest]: It's the largest non-governmental organization in the world.
[Guest]: It's the most powerful non-governmental organization, or at least one of them in the democratic
[Guest]: world.
[Guest]: I've heard that people ascribe to things like AIPAC or the NRA in the US, the RSS is much
[Guest]: more powerful than any of those groups.
[Guest]: I think that's his doing.
[Guest]: He takes the idea of the individual Marathi Brahmin, who is willing to take up this work
[Guest]: in parts of the country whose language he doesn't speak, Gujarat, sets up shop there
[Guest]: in one room, doesn't marry, gives himself up to this work.
[Guest]: What is this work?
[Guest]: Conducting the shakha in the morning, and then for the rest of the day doing work, whatever
[Guest]: it is that they wish to do.
[Guest]: But making a life out of this, very few people can do this, they still do it.
[Guest]: You have people from the RSS that run single teacher schools across the Adivasi belt, but
[Guest]: they're bringing people out of what they think as being a manimism and into a more puranic
[Guest]: faith.
[Guest]: So he formulates this sort of easily replicable model, and he does it.
[Guest]: So very soon you've got hundreds of these shakhas opening all over the country.
[Guest]: Ten years after he takes over the RSS, we have a constitution.
[Guest]: Two years after that, we have the first election, and the Jana Sangh is formed.
[Guest]: So then he supplies material to the party in terms of cadre, in terms of people who
[Guest]: can stand, Vajpayee is one, Madhwani is another, who come out of that, Shekhawat is a third.
[Guest]: And he's there behind all of this, running the shakhas, making sure that the organization
[Guest]: is continuously built and built to the end that he thought it was right.
[Guest]: I think the shakha should be seen in a particular light.
[Guest]: Why do they do exercises that require training with lathis, who are they training to fight
[Guest]: against?
[Guest]: Are they going to fight the Chinese at the border?
[Guest]: No, that's not.
[Guest]: They're going to fight other Indians.
[Guest]: That's what the shakha does.
[Guest]: In a riot, the shakha is the locus of the violence.
[Guest]: It's the one place where the neighborhood young men who've trained in the physical stuff
[Guest]: who know one another and can bond and can trust one another, can take a collective action
[Guest]: that the individual so called cowardly Hindu doesn't.
[Guest]: And he does a very good job of it.
[Guest]: The RSS can overwhelm the security apparatus of the average Indian city very easily, as
[Amit Varma]: we've seen in Gujarat.
[Amit Varma]: So all the memes that are floating around after Pulwama that you know, the RSS should
[Amit Varma]: send people with their sticks to fight at the border actually misplaced because the
[Guest]: idea is not that they're going to fight Pakistan and China.
[Guest]: Yeah, well, to them, I think Pakistan is just an extension of the Indian Muslim.
[Guest]: I don't think they see it in a way that most other Indians would, you would see it as a
[Guest]: foreign country.
[Guest]: You wouldn't I mean, you would you would send some sort of brotherhood in terms of the food
[Guest]: being the same and the music being the same and you know.
[Guest]: But it's it's as different to somebody from Gujarat as Tamil Nadu would be or whatever.
[Guest]: It's a different place.
[Guest]: And it is separated also by government.
[Guest]: So it would be properly foreign for them.
[Guest]: It's not that way.
[Guest]: I think they would see the Muslim in Gulbarga as being identical to the one in Lahore.
[Guest]: It's the same thing.
[Guest]: It's yours.
[Guest]: You're on my land and you don't belong in my country.
[Guest]: If you do belong, it is on the sufferance.
[Guest]: I think that is that that they would say that that okay, it's fine.
[Guest]: But we whoever we is has a privilege and rights that you don't.
[Amit Varma]: And the way you describe it, it sounds almost that Golwalkar was a management and strategic
[Amit Varma]: genius of sorts that he figured out that this was a way to grow the organization, build
[Amit Varma]: feeling of community and brotherhood and all of those things.
[Amit Varma]: But did these things just happen or did he actually plan them that way?
[Guest]: I'm not sure what the pre-Golwalkar RSS looked like.
[Guest]: Mr. Modi in his very fawning a biographical sketch of Golwalkar recounts this sort of
[Guest]: an interview that Golwalkar has with somebody and that and the person says, why are you
[Guest]: just calling people over and doing this, you know, simple childish stuff like playing games
[Guest]: and all.
[Guest]: And Golwalkar says to him that we are masters of the science of organization.
[Guest]: He uses the words in English according to Mr. Modi.
[Guest]: And I think that certainly Mr. Modi sees him in that light that he's somebody who was able
[Guest]: to create a format that especially in urban India was easy to replicate and which he did
[Guest]: replicate.
[Guest]: To be fair, most of the expansion of the RSS from being hundreds across India to being
[Guest]: the tens of thousands happened much after his death.
[Amit Varma]: It happened in the 80s and 90s.
[Amit Varma]: And despite all this, like you said that there wasn't much intellectual content coming from
[Amit Varma]: Golwalkar, like in your notes, there's a line I'll quote on Golwalkar, which you say where
[Amit Varma]: you say, quote, he sets great store by feeling and emotion because thinking takes away from
[Amit Varma]: the strong sense of identity and communitarianism.
[Amit Varma]: That is his passion.
[Guest]: Stop quote.
[Guest]: So there is no, so if you think of an ideology, it would be a set of rules or principles that
[Guest]: have something basic that is underlying that you're trying to reach at something that is
[Guest]: large.
[Guest]: There's nothing like that in the writing, certainly of Golwalkar.
[Guest]: And in none of the Hindutva, Amadei logs, will you find anything that even approaches
[Guest]: an ideology?
[Guest]: It's quite basic.
[Guest]: They will talk very lightly of Greek thought or so Upadhyay says that there are that modern
[Guest]: Western systems.
[Guest]: And he says that the three main ones are nationalism, democracy, and socialism are in some way not
[Guest]: whole and people in the West feel insecure because of this lack of sort of wholesomeness.
[Guest]: And he says, the reason is that they are not able to satisfy the four aspects of human
[Guest]: being.
[Guest]: And he says that these four aspects are body, mind, intellect, and soul, how mind is different
[Guest]: from the intellect.
[Guest]: He doesn't explain and what soul is.
[Guest]: He doesn't say Golwalkar talks about the fact that, okay, we are quite bad at science, fine.
[Guest]: But Hindus are masters of the science of spirit.
[Guest]: What does that mean?
[Guest]: What does spirit mean?
[Guest]: Does he mean it in the sense of sort of he and both, Upadhyay, do they both mean it in
[Guest]: the sense of the transmigration of souls and things like that?
[Guest]: You don't know because they don't really expand.
[Guest]: They just assume that the reader will nod his head and say, oh, yeah, you know, there
[Guest]: are four parts to the human being, body, mind, intellect, and soul.
[Guest]: And that Hindus are the masters of the science of spirit.
[Guest]: And what is the justification that Golwalkar gives for this?
[Guest]: He says that, well, Jesus only saw Satan.
[Guest]: And you know, Mohammed only met Gabriel.
[Guest]: It is the Hindu saints that actually saw God and witnessed God and knew about his attributes.
[Guest]: But from there to have a like, like an objective discussion is not easy, because you're talking
[Guest]: to somebody who believes in that sort of thing.
[Guest]: So it's quite vacuous in many ways.
[Guest]: You know, it's quite disappointing, because if you see some of the more militaristic stuff
[Guest]: that that the other faiths have done, there is a fair amount of intellectual rigor there.
[Guest]: There is none here.
[Amit Varma]: There is it's nothing that there's a lot of what seems to be the waffling you find in
[Amit Varma]: self-help books.
[Amit Varma]: And also a lot of sort of the way he, Golwalkar seems to rouse his followers is not by talking
[Amit Varma]: about Hindutva itself, but by the threats that it faces from outside, for example.
[Guest]: Yeah, tell me a bit about that.
[Guest]: Well, threat mostly inside.
[Guest]: So the fact is that, that the enemy is already within us and needs to be sorted.
[Guest]: So I think that is the one thing that is constant to all of these people who wrote about the
[Guest]: subject, that the enemy is primarily the Indian Muslim who needs to be fixed, needs to be
[Guest]: put in their place.
[Guest]: But there's too many of them, we don't know what to do with them.
[Guest]: But we will show that we are not going to be the kind of nation we were 1000 years ago,
[Guest]: that we were the embodiment of the ideal spirit, you know, caste was very good.
[Guest]: And we had these great kings, then these people came and they conquered us.
[Guest]: The idea of slavery and being subjects over 1000 years runs very strongly through this.
[Guest]: There is a strong sense of belief that in some way what Modi represents today is the
[Guest]: breaking out from that slavery, both the period of direct rule by foreigners, and by those
[Amit Varma]: that they left behind.
[Amit Varma]: And this is again a question I was saving for the end.
[Amit Varma]: But since it's come up now, I'll ask it anyway.
[Amit Varma]: And something I wonder about, which is that there is a sense of grievance and the humiliation
[Amit Varma]: of the past and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And some of it isn't even true, it's just made up.
[Amit Varma]: But the point is that this is the sort of history that these guys invoke to rouse people
[Amit Varma]: to passion.
[Amit Varma]: But the common person like growing up in the India that you are, where Hindus are the majority
[Amit Varma]: and Brahmins especially are incredibly privileged, where do they get this historic sense of humiliation
[Amit Varma]: from?
[Amit Varma]: It's not that they live amid history and amid the ruins or anything like that.
[Amit Varma]: You know, why does it rouse them to such passion that a temple was broken so many years ago,
[Amit Varma]: or, you know, the Muslims ruled us in centuries of which there is really no sign today.
[Guest]: Some would say that this is the narrative that the British constructed and left behind,
[Guest]: that the first schools in Gujarat only come in the 1850s.
[Guest]: So Elphinstone builds them, which is only 170 years ago, right?
[Guest]: So before that, you don't have any form of organized teaching.
[Guest]: So when do you come into group think, when do you have a sense of your nationhood?
[Guest]: Fairly recently, as a Gujarati, I'd say that my own sense of bigotry and prejudice comes
[Guest]: out of a popular history of four volumes written by K M Munshi on Somnath.
[Guest]: And even though you might not know much about histories, particularly in the sense of dates
[Guest]: and such things, you will have had a sense of Somnath in Gujarat, purely through these
[Guest]: four fairly recent novels.
[Guest]: And I think that a lot of it might be that, that it's a, the fact that it's a fairly recently
[Guest]: educated nation, at the turn of the 20th century, 4% of India was illiterate.
[Guest]: I mean, it's quite remarkable to think of that, it's not that long ago, just 119 years.
[Guest]: And secondly, that you're living cheek by jowl with a very large community, which doesn't
[Guest]: share what you think are the pillars of your own faith, you know, vegetarianism or whatever
[Guest]: else.
[Guest]: So yeah, it's, but I don't know for sure.
[Guest]: I haven't thought about that.
[Guest]: This is the first time that I'm actually confronted, why do they feel this?
[Guest]: I really don't know.
[Amit Varma]: Because it also strikes me that, you know, a lot of people who are born Hindu, aren't
[Amit Varma]: reading these books, for example, the ones you pointed out about Somnath, they're not
[Amit Varma]: surrounded by signs of that humiliation.
[Amit Varma]: So part of the reason that these histories persist, or these grievances persist, must
[Amit Varma]: be not only because they're being brainwashed into it, but because they need these to validate
[Amit Varma]: something else.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe there's an innate bigotry and they need to build this backstory to validate that.
[Amit Varma]: Is that possible?
[Guest]: I know for sure that the resistance of the Indian Muslim to the monopolization of power
[Guest]: by the Hindus under Congress is not seen sympathetically at all by most Hindus.
[Guest]: So for us, when we are taught in school, Jinnah is the villain.
[Guest]: And if you're sort of Hindutva minded, then the Congress got conned, or they were part
[Guest]: of the game itself.
[Guest]: But the idea that there was a legitimate claim to a share in power is not seen sympathetically.
[Guest]: Today you could give data to the average Indian middle class person and say that the last
[Guest]: person from Gujarat, who is Muslim, who was elected to the Lok Sabha came in 1985.
[Guest]: And this is a community that has produced Premji, that has produced Khura Kiwala, that
[Guest]: has produced Jinnah, Ahmed Patel, last one in 85, not a single person from UP today has
[Guest]: no Muslim in the Lok Sabha.
[Guest]: The BJP of the 1100 or 1200 legislators they have nationally have four Muslims.
[Guest]: Does this make people uncomfortable?
[Guest]: I would say no, they're okay with it.
[Guest]: But in such a society, it's easy to see why you can demonize a community and feel no sympathy
[Guest]: for it and have no empathy for the fact that you've marginalized them totally from power
[Guest]: and any demand that they might make to share power would be seen in negative terms, you
[Guest]: know, that you're trying to break up my country or like whatever else.
[Guest]: So I don't know what the wellspring is, where it comes from for people in the 20s.
[Guest]: But certainly, after 47 partition would be one great trigger for this hatred.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, a tangential question here, which is that, if we look at all the other
[Amit Varma]: parties like the Congress and so on, it's easy to say that they are basically election
[Amit Varma]: winning machines, and there's no core philosophy to them.
[Amit Varma]: And at least when it comes to the BJP, there is some kind of however badly formulated this,
[Amit Varma]: there are some core philosophical beliefs, but where that seems to come under challenge
[Amit Varma]: is when you look at how they won 2014, for example, someone I had on my show a few months
[Amit Varma]: ago was Prashanth Jha, who wrote the book about how the BJP won.
[Amit Varma]: And he points out about how Amit Shah went along building those sort of caste coalitions.
[Amit Varma]: And so very early on in UP, for example, they figured out, okay, we are not getting the
[Amit Varma]: Muslim vote.
[Amit Varma]: Obviously, they will nominate someone there.
[Amit Varma]: But then among the OBCs, they know that there are resentments among the non-Yadav OBCs.
[Amit Varma]: So they bring them in among the non-Jatav Dalits against Mayawati.
[Amit Varma]: So they try to bring them into the fold and he tries to bring a coalition like that.
[Amit Varma]: And at a certain point, Jha in his book quotes a Dalit scholar as saying that BJP in some
[Amit Varma]: places is actually the Dalit party, because they're not only getting Dalit office bearers,
[Amit Varma]: but they're building Dalit temples, and so on and actually investing in the community.
[Amit Varma]: And my question here is not of how genuine that is, or whatever is obviously driven by
[Amit Varma]: political imperatives.
[Amit Varma]: But then with the BJP, there is, again, and I'm just thinking aloud, that there is then
[Amit Varma]: that dissonance between what seems to be a guiding philosophy, which is not an inclusive
[Amit Varma]: guiding philosophy, on one hand, and on the other hand, the imperatives of winning elections,
[Amit Varma]: which typically would make parties sociopathic in the sense that they don't really then have
[Amit Varma]: any core beliefs, they just do whatever it takes to win votes.
[Guest]: The sort of really interesting thing about the BJP's attitude to caste is that it has
[Guest]: not allowed to any large extent, what its ideologues have written into practice.
[Guest]: As long as you are vaguely okay with the fact that they felt that caste was a good thing
[Guest]: and so on, it doesn't really matter that you are not yourself a Brahmin.
[Guest]: You can become the leader of India, if you're not a Brahmin.
[Guest]: But you have to be Brahminical.
[Guest]: I think that's what the rules say.
[Guest]: So Mr. Modi comes from a community that is meat eating.
[Amit Varma]: But then Sabarkar and Golvarkar would use that to say, let's see inclusive, we mean
[Amit Varma]: Hinduism is a way of life and not as...
[Guest]: Indeed.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: They have that space.
[Guest]: They also have, there is a brotherhood, there is a sense that when two swayamsevaks meet,
[Guest]: there is a shared idea of this country, there is a shared idea of who the enemy is, there's
[Guest]: a shared idea of what the problems are.
[Guest]: And I think that has held them together and given them a kind of network, which no other
[Guest]: party has, and no other party can have, outside of the jati, abiradhari networks, that most
[Guest]: parties run on in the north, for example, the BJP has a kind of underlying layer, especially
[Guest]: in towns and cities, which holds the whole project together.
[Amit Varma]: Going back to Golvarkar now, you know, as you pointed out a few years after he becomes
[Amit Varma]: the head of the RSS, you have partition and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And I noticed one interesting fact about Golvarkar was that he used to make Sanskrit the national
[Amit Varma]: language, much as, you know, Urdu became the national language there.
[Amit Varma]: To what extent is the Pakistan project actually a model or an inspiration for the Hindutva
[Amit Varma]: leading thinkers to do a Hindu version of that?
[Guest]: I don't know.
[Guest]: Pakistan's origins are from the modernist point of view, they are not of anti-deluvian.
[Guest]: So the person who coined the word Pakistan was in London, Allama Iqbal, who thought of
[Guest]: this kind of utopia in Northwest India, where people would reformulate Islam and make it
[Guest]: modern was not a traditionalist at all.
[Guest]: So you would think of them as being extreme.
[Guest]: They were very, very advanced in the way that they were thinking.
[Guest]: That's not the Hindutva project.
[Guest]: The Hindutva project is most comfortable looking back rather than looking in front, that the
[Guest]: stronger emotions are about the defeats of the past and so on.
[Guest]: So I don't know whether it was a model.
[Guest]: I do know that he wanted Sanskrit in some sense to be elevated, but he also felt that
[Guest]: till such time as everybody learned it, it was okay to use Hindi.
[Guest]: And of course, it ran into trouble because of the revolution in the South and the rebellion,
[Guest]: I should say, and then he would have, you know, withdrawn that the vehemence.
[Guest]: But for most of the 60s and 70s, the RSS had very little power.
[Guest]: The Janasang, the previous version of the BJP had about two and a half percent of the
[Guest]: vote in Gujarat for most of the 70s.
[Guest]: Till Babri happens, they are a very marginal power.
[Guest]: So even though they might have felt it strongly, and even if they might have externalized things
[Guest]: like we should make Sanskrit the language of the country, they had very little power
[Guest]: or means to be able to either amplify their view or certainly to be able to impose it.
[Amit Varma]: So was Babri something that was inevitable as a trigger of a change that was coming or
[Amit Varma]: was it an episode that just happened to make this whole thing explode and it won't have
[Guest]: otherwise?
[Guest]: I would recommend a book written by two men called both called Jha, I think, to your listeners
[Guest]: on the Babri issue.
[Guest]: It was festering.
[Guest]: So it's history predates of independence, the controversy, and then it's given fresh
[Guest]: life in the 80s.
[Guest]: But I believe that Hindutva would have found its sureness of foot elsewhere if it had not
[Guest]: been for Babri.
[Guest]: Babri was very important, it gave them a momentum as a political party, which they would never
[Guest]: have been able to find, you know, otherwise.
[Guest]: But we should also remember that the momentum and the expansion of the party happens primarily
[Guest]: also through civic violence, when the BJP participates in some way in the murder of
[Guest]: the Muslims of this country, it is able to expand itself.
[Guest]: In the recent phase, the full blown, you know, riot has been replaced with a series of sort
[Guest]: of episodes, lynchings or, you know, things like what happened in UP.
[Guest]: But it is not just the symbolic aspect of the movement, I think the campaign is also
[Guest]: built on mobilizing people, validating the violence that they perpetrate, and they have
[Guest]: no shame in being able to accept that fact.
[Amit Varma]: I've taken up a lot of your time.
[Amit Varma]: So I think we'll skip talking about Upadhyaya and I'll just recommend my listeners to read
[Amit Varma]: your book when it comes out.
[Amit Varma]: But some few, a few broader questions.
[Amit Varma]: Now the term Hindu Rashtra, obviously, as you pointed out, was coined by Hegdevar, like
[Amit Varma]: he met Savarkar in 25 and later Dattier formed the RSS and instead of Hindutva, he used the
[Amit Varma]: term Hindu Rashtra, I mean, whether he coined it or not.
[Amit Varma]: Now, we are talking about the Hindu Rashtra today and you're writing this book because
[Amit Varma]: of political events, what has happened since 2014, and the new dominance of the BJP sort
[Amit Varma]: of as a central pole of Indian politics.
[Amit Varma]: But my question is, does the Hindu Rashtra exist outside of politics?
[Amit Varma]: Is it primarily a culture thing?
[Amit Varma]: And is the politics just one inevitable outcome of that?
[Guest]: I think politics amplifies it a lot.
[Guest]: It does exist outside of politics.
[Guest]: Maybe it's not as pronounced as it is.
[Guest]: Maybe if it were not molested by politics, it would remain dormant.
[Guest]: It does exist.
[Guest]: It is there.
[Guest]: I think that the idea, if it were not, it would not be the case that we are the only
[Guest]: country in South Asia that is not majoritarian by law, or has tried to be at some point.
[Guest]: It is, there is something about this part of the world, where if you, where might is
[Guest]: right, if there's more of you than the other or the people that you think of as being the
[Amit Varma]: other.
[Amit Varma]: But also the fact that we didn't give into majoritarianism could be a combination of
[Amit Varma]: circumstance that we had the people we had framing the constitution and inertia.
[Guest]: Maybe.
[Guest]: Yeah, that's a good, that's a good explanation.
[Guest]: But I think that we would struggle even more than the Muslims of Pakistan in trying to
[Guest]: find what that right, a projection of faith onto law is.
[Guest]: It would be very difficult.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll ask you to expand on that now.
[Amit Varma]: You said at the start of the episode that there can be no such thing as a Hindutva constitution.
[Guest]: You know, after Ram comes back from Ayodhya, there is a turmoil in the court.
[Guest]: And there is a Brahmin who comes to him with his son who's dead.
[Guest]: And it turns and this, this son is a flawless, he's not done a thing wrong in his life.
[Guest]: He's only 14.
[Guest]: And the court tries to figure out why he's died.
[Guest]: And the high priests say that it's because of an evil in the world.
[Guest]: And what is this evil?
[Guest]: It is that a Shudra is performing penance by trying to, can't be the word read because
[Guest]: he can't read.
[Guest]: But he's speaking out words from the Veda, which he's not supposed to.
[Guest]: Ram goes and beheads him.
[Guest]: This is the name of the Shudra is Shambhuka.
[Guest]: This is in the Valmikannamayana.
[Guest]: That's what the faith, the basis of the faith is cast.
[Guest]: You might say, no, it is an innovation.
[Guest]: It's not the case.
[Guest]: But if you open your eyes and look at the society, the distinction between Dalit and
[Guest]: Brahmin is quite clear.
[Guest]: The access is quite clear.
[Guest]: The history of India, the modern history of India in terms of access to temples is not
[Guest]: that old.
[Guest]: What is it that we use from that faith to be able to make India a proper Hindu Rashtra?
[Guest]: We can discriminate against minorities.
[Guest]: That's what most of these states in South Asia have sort of ended up doing.
[Guest]: But what part of the faith can we actually implement to make it a Hindu Rashtra for Hindus?
[Guest]: You can have a Hindu Rashtra for Muslims, you know, you can't, you can't stand for PM.
[Guest]: Pakistan discriminated through law.
[Guest]: We've done it through a practice.
[Guest]: It's impossible to conceive of a Muslim becoming the PM of this country.
[Guest]: Maybe in a coalition, but even that would be difficult.
[Guest]: What part of the Hindu faith can we reduce and say that this is something that is applicable
[Guest]: to modernity that's missing right now that will make us more pious?
[Guest]: I think that fundamentally that is the question.
[Guest]: For the Pakistanis, it became things like Riba.
[Guest]: So Jesus says that he chucks the money changers, they're called out of the temple and usury
[Guest]: becomes a bad word in the Semitic faiths.
[Guest]: So for centuries, the Jews have a monopoly in Europe on access to capital, they are the
[Guest]: only ones who can charge you no interest.
[Guest]: Though Islam is much closer to Judaism than it is to Christianity, and it brings back
[Guest]: indeed into the Semitic faiths, the ideas of circumcision and you know, pork and things
[Guest]: like that.
[Guest]: From Christianity, they take the idea that usury is a sin.
[Guest]: The problem is that there's no modern banking system in the seventh century.
[Guest]: But all three of Pakistan's constitutions have has the same writing that the state shall
[Guest]: try to eliminate Riba.
[Guest]: What happens is that the Supreme Court in 1999 and in 2000 abolished interest.
[Guest]: You pass an order saying interest henceforth is abolished.
[Guest]: But the modern economy will collapse, there is no replacement.
[Guest]: What is the justification that if we do this, we'll get the blessings from God because we're
[Guest]: doing this pious thing.
[Guest]: That's not how modern states work.
[Guest]: Pakistan, there are five pillars of Islam, Shahada, Som, Salah, Zakat, Hajj.
[Guest]: So let's take fasting.
[Guest]: In Dubai, like in many of the Gulf states in Ramzan, they shut, you know, restaurants
[Guest]: have to be shut in the period of Ramzan, you know, till dusk, and that maybe makes the
[Guest]: state a little more pious.
[Guest]: You can actually implement that.
[Guest]: You're trying to enforce your faith onto law.
[Guest]: That's one way of doing it.
[Guest]: You can do that with, Pakistan tried to do that with Zakat.
[Guest]: So that is alms or a tax.
[Guest]: So under Zia, what they say is, okay, on the first of Ramzan, we will deduct two and a
[Guest]: half percent from all the bank deposits that are there, except for non-Sunnis.
[Guest]: So because the Shia have their own clergy and they give their own money to them and
[Guest]: so on.
[Guest]: What started happening was Sunnis started declaring themselves Shia, not have the money
[Guest]: deducted from their accounts, and then they had to water down that law.
[Amit Varma]: Which shows humans will game anything, even religion.
[Guest]: Indeed, I'm saying it's not possible to take a set of philosophical ideas, constructs,
[Guest]: precepts, faith, belief type thing, and apply it to the modern world in the misplaced thinking
[Guest]: that this will in some way improve your country and therefore Hindu Rashtra for it to become
[Guest]: Hindu and non-discriminatory.
[Guest]: I can completely understand the fact that when we say Hindu Rashtra, we'll say we'll
[Guest]: kick the Muslims out.
[Guest]: They can go to Pakistan.
[Guest]: They can't eat beef.
[Guest]: They have to give us their mosque.
[Guest]: They have to give us their constitutional autonomy in Kashmir.
[Guest]: They have to surrender their personal law.
[Guest]: All that is fine.
[Guest]: What does Hindu Rashtra offer Hindus?
[Guest]: I think that is the problem.
[Guest]: The question is that it doesn't have anything inside the faith that can be imposed.
[Guest]: And that's a good thing in the way that Islam was able to impose, say, prayer or fasting
[Guest]: or, you know, the abolition of interest.
[Guest]: That's what makes it impossible.
[Guest]: But that also brings the focus entirely onto minorities and discrimination.
[Guest]: The only way that Hindutva can express itself is in negative terms.
[Guest]: It cannot express itself in positive terms.
[Guest]: The three primary demands of a political Hindutva is, you know, surrender your mosque, surrender
[Guest]: your personal law, surrender your constitutional autonomy in Kashmir.
[Guest]: There is there is nothing positive that it demands that will create a new or a vibrant
[Amit Varma]: nation.
[Amit Varma]: And yet it has such momentum in our electoral politics and in our culture.
[Amit Varma]: So is it that people are then so full of hate and bigotry that this is so appealing to them?
[Guest]: I think two things.
[Guest]: I think that we should examine what you've just said.
[Guest]: If you feel disturbed and I feel disturbed and many of us feel disturbed with the way
[Guest]: that the beef lynching is a new phenomenon.
[Guest]: We have introduced it to our to our country.
[Guest]: It didn't exist just like the blasphemy lynchings did not exist in Pakistan till the law came
[Guest]: to be till Maharashtra and Haryana did not act on the law in late 2014 in 2015.
[Guest]: And the PM had not expressed himself strongly.
[Guest]: We did not have the phenomenon of lynching on the issue of beef.
[Guest]: This is new.
[Guest]: We have gifted it to ourselves.
[Guest]: And I think that we should ask ourselves, why don't more Indians recoil from this?
[Guest]: I don't know the answer to it.
[Guest]: But having said that, it is also the case that the BJP is a normal political party in
[Guest]: India with a base that in large measure is based on caste and based on divisions at the
[Guest]: local level and not particularly on any kind of ideology.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm again thinking aloud here, trying to think about possibilities for why we don't
[Amit Varma]: recoil from this.
[Amit Varma]: And one thing that I've kind of believed is that look, all of us contain multitudes.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, just as the Hindu guy who's a bigot and who supports this narrative and
[Amit Varma]: who wants to see a Hindu Rashtra, but there are other facets of him beyond this bigotry.
[Amit Varma]: He also wants to be prosperous, he also wants to go to a concert, he also wants to do whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And there just aren't enough narratives appealing to the better angels of the nature, as you
[Amit Varma]: might say.
[Amit Varma]: So is it then the case that this is also a cultural failure on the part of others to
[Amit Varma]: create those narratives and a political failure on the part of other political parties to
[Amit Varma]: come up with appealing narratives that can counter the Hindutva narrative?
[Guest]: I don't know.
[Guest]: But I think that you are on to something when you say what you just did, that there is an
[Guest]: absence of narrative to the side of the kind of faith based, hate based stuff that is appealing
[Guest]: to large numbers of people.
[Guest]: I certainly don't see it.
[Guest]: Maybe it's there and I don't see it.
[Guest]: You know, you could be you could be in India and be reading the newspaper and not seeing
[Guest]: many things, you know, and that's normally it's a large, it's a very large place.
[Guest]: But to the extent that there is a non hate based narrative, even that seems to me to
[Guest]: be controlled by the BJP, the idea of modernity through nationalism, the idea of non dynastic
[Guest]: politics, the idea of honesty in politics, you know, a lot of that seems to be owned
[Guest]: by the BJP, especially since Modi and it might well be that it's a failure of the other side
[Guest]: to put forward something that is appealing, but I find it disturbing that more people
[Guest]: are not upset by the morning newspaper.
[Amit Varma]: It seems to me to be strange.
[Amit Varma]: On that note, I've taken enough of your time, I'll ask you one final question, which I usually
[Amit Varma]: ask my guests on whatever the subject we're talking about is, which is I asked him what
[Amit Varma]: makes him hope and what makes him despair, but I'll be a little more specific.
[Amit Varma]: I'll say that.
[Amit Varma]: Number one, what is at stake in these elections?
[Amit Varma]: And number two, within a 10 year window of time, the next 10 years, what is your best
[Amit Varma]: case scenario for India?
[Amit Varma]: And what is your worst case scenario?
[Guest]: There's this funny line, there's this old poet, who's, who's asked, you know, okay,
[Guest]: he says, I think that our fear is not that we will deteriorate into something worse.
[Guest]: But the fact that we are okay with how bad it is now.
[Amit Varma]: That what has been normalized now would be the worst case scenario.
[Guest]: Indeed, indeed, this is a weird country, you've got violence in Kashmir, including the deaths
[Guest]: of the armed forces higher in 2018, than in 2014, and higher, progressively so.
[Guest]: To claim deterrence or to claim a hard military posture in the face of data, to me is astonishing.
[Guest]: I mean, you slap me and I kicked you to whatever end, but the damage here done to me and my
[Guest]: own is real.
[Guest]: But it doesn't seem to really affect the narrative.
[Guest]: In the larger media space, we are seen as being doing some some great things, you know,
[Guest]: so it's bad enough as it is, I hope it doesn't get worse.
[Guest]: I think we have enough within the within our societies, and I think that we have more than
[Guest]: one to offer resistance.
[Guest]: I don't think that we are all the same as a Gujarat, I think Gujarat is special, in
[Guest]: many ways, in good ways, in many ways in really bad ones.
[Guest]: But I don't think that the rest of the country is like that at all.
[Amit Varma]: So what makes you despair is that it's more of the same?
[Guest]: Yeah, I think it's not going away.
[Guest]: I think that we have to live with this for a very long time.
[Guest]: It doesn't matter who wins.
[Guest]: In 2019.
[Guest]: I think the idea that we have normalized violence against individuals who are vulnerable, the
[Guest]: idea that we can marginalize people entirely, a community which has what 160 70 million
[Guest]: people out of our legislatures, and it's okay.
[Guest]: To me, that is unacceptable.
[Guest]: But it seems to be fine for for most of us.
[Guest]: And I don't think that's going to change anytime soon.
[Amit Varma]: On that hopeful note, Aakar, thanks so much for coming on the scene, it was really insightful.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to the show, do go directly to the source and read the books
[Amit Varma]: Aakar and I spoke about by Savarkar, Golwalkar and Dindyal Upadhyay, which are linked from
[Amit Varma]: the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: Both Aakar and I could be biased against Hindutva.
[Amit Varma]: So please do make up your own mind.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow Aakar's columns online by putting a Google alert for him or just searching for
[Amit Varma]: his name on Google News.
[Amit Varma]: He isn't too active on social media, which is a smart decision.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me on Twitter at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: The scene in the unseen is supported by the Takshashila Institution, an independent center
[Amit Varma]: for research and education in public policy.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse all our past episodes at sceneunseen.in and thinkpragati.com.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening.
[Unknown]: Hey, this is Sridhar Dittya and I'm Amit Doshi and we host Shunya One.
[Unknown]: It's a really fun podcast where we talk to some of the best entrepreneurs in the country.
[Unknown]: Yes.
[Unknown]: We cover everything from their startup challenges to what they're building and all the future
[Unknown]: of technology right here.
[Unknown]: So catch us on the IBM podcast website, Apple, wherever you listen to your podcast from.
[Unknown]: Hi, my name is Anupam Gupta.
[Unknown]: I'm B50 on Twitter.
[Unknown]: I am the host of Pesa Pesa, the show that talks money.
[Unknown]: On my show, I speak to experts from every field of money and finance, from stock markets,
[Unknown]: equities, debt funds, credit cards, life insurance, every possible area of money and finance that
[Unknown]: you can think of.
[Unknown]: We even did an episode on cryptocurrency.
[Unknown]: I've got fantastic guests from mutual funds to personal finance experts everywhere, robo
[Unknown]: advisory startups, just name it, we've got it.
[Unknown]: At Pesa Pesa, we help you make smart decisions about money.
[Unknown]: You work hard for money, now make your money work hard for you.
[Unknown]: New episodes out every Monday and you can listen to my show on the IBM podcast app or
[Unknown]: any other podcasting app that you have.
[Unknown]: Pesa Pesa is brought to you by PTM money.